so mr peterson welcome to iceland thank
you for being with us um how do you like
the place
it's great that's why i came back i was
here four years ago and i had a really
good time i brought my mother and my
aunt
elderly women we
along with my wife we traveled all
through iceland
we went up to see the origins of the
parliament
that was very interesting that geology's
interesting
it
the whole place has a good feeling a
feeling of i would say stability and
kind of hominess and also an
entrepreneurial
twist that's very uh positive
and so it's a small country but it seems
to punch above its weight culturally and
has a reputation
i think internationally for being like a
cool destination and an admirable place
so that's all great as far as i'm
concerned
you're speaking to a audience of maybe
thousand tonight it's sold out
people won't see you here
what are you going to tell them tonight
i don't know i've been doing
q a format presentations and so we use a
good technology called slido sli.do
that enables the audience to submit
questions and then to vote them up very
rapidly with no technological delay
and so
we i usually pick i say we because my
wife asks me the questions
we usually pick one deep question
and i spend 40 minutes or so answering
that depending on how long it takes and
then
a series of more practical questions and
so it's a very good
technique let's say or strategy to try
to
go
into the depths
and and also to connect that to the
practicalities on the ground
practicalities
and so
i usually touch on
religious issues and then
cultural issues
pertaining mostly now to the culture war
that we seem to be engulfed in i would
say not only in the west but in the rest
of the world and which is actually
broken out into a real war because i
believe that the war between russia and
ukraine or really between russia and the
west rest of the west is a
civil war not just
what would you call it post-soviet
territorial expansion on the part of the
russians
um
what values do you think there are stake
there like russia against the west what
do you think it's fighting it's just is
it
liberal values against conservative or
is it something more no complicated it's
more complicated than liberal against
conservative
well i think the
russians
are
or
yes
i think putin has
weaponized a certain degree of anti-woke
sentiment among russians
and
some of that
anti-woke doctrine let's say which is
more conservative he may also believe
but minimally he's managed to use it
very effectively on the propaganda front
and
that's
certainly one of the factors that's
driving the war and sustaining it
and causing it
and so but uh in in terms of russia and
the war uh
people worry about the expansion of
russia and that's why america is helping
ukraine uh
uh well there are that's not very like
there are many explanations to it but
like
what do you think is the bigger threat
china or russia like uh
should we worry as much about russia as
we do i mean
they're christian and they are more like
us in china well we have to worry about
them at the moment that's for sure and
they do have nuclear bombs lots of them
which they're rattling
quite
uh
vociferously at the moment
and
china
i have two minds about china
i think the chinese government is to
call it reprehensible barely scratches
the surface in china
translated my maps of meaning
i shouldn't have allowed it but the book
first book i wrote is a very thick book
it's about 400 pages of dense text in
english and i think the chinese
translation was
that thick
3 8 inch and pretty big type i have no
idea what it says but the probability
that it says anything like what i wrote
is pretty damn low
and
china's social credit system
which we are rushing to imitate just
like we imitated the totalitarian
response to kovid that's a major threat
to to long-term freedom in every sense
of the word that's
a dreadful
fascist intervention and i say fascist
because it
it involves the
union of the state and media and the
technocratic apparatus
and that's definitely a huge threat to
us
china is has devolved in many ways on
the political front over the last five
or six years we were hoping that
integrating china into the western
economy would produce a certain
liberalization on their part and to some
degree that's happened and certainly
that's
addressed the problem of poverty in
china which was a very good thing but
the chinese are not our allies and we're
very foolish in the west to allow
ourselves to become fractured i think
it's a catastrophe that we didn't
integrate russia into nato when we had
the opportunity because we had the
opportunity and we squandered it and
that was a big mistake and god only
knows what we're going to pay for that
i'm very nervous about the fall because
the food front looks dismal and
the best projections i've encountered
suggest that 150 million people will be
hungry by the fall and that'll mean mass
migration into europe minimum apart from
the deaths
which fall particularly heavily on
children
in all likelihood so yeah we've got a
mess on our hands
and then you know everyone seems to be
fiddling while rome burns the the biden
democrats are occupied with the most
preposterous idiocies that can possibly
be imagined at the moment
when there's this terrible
occurrence on the international front
that could pull us all in
that we're and we're do we seem to be
doing everything we can to be pulled in
like speaking on uh the python
administration uh
since we're uh while we're talking about
politics um
there there has been like we were here
four years ago there have been great
shifts in politics uh oh just a couple
of years three years maybe two years
uh a lot of democrats when they saw
burnley being removed by the
establishment and biden put in they
become they became so disappointed with
the democratic party that they moved
maybe further to the right and or to
being more conservative like now we have
uh russell brandt uh endorsing tucker
carlson they have like a space where
they are
uh
being conservative together same thing
with bill maher yeah and yeah well
what's happening is that the
i think because of the disproportionate
effect of a tiny minority of people
probably amplified by social media the
political acceptable political landscape
i guess they call that the overton
window has shifted tremendously to the
left so for example in canada
this is also a policy issue the liberals
are farther left than the socialists
were 10 years ago in terms of their
policies and their pronouncements and so
that's left a lot of people who would
have been on the center
now
uncomfortably straddling the divide
between liberal and conservative and you
definitely see that reflected in people
like russell brand and bill maher brand
has got a pretty vicious libertarian
streak and that mitigates against some
of his more leftist ideas and mar just
seems to be waking up finally
um
you're uh doing a lecture here tonight
and uh in the wake of you coming here we
had
which was maybe foreseeable on twitter
people are saying like uh
old comments of yours surface
what the one about the lipstick and the
word that's a good comment lipstick what
the hell do people think
what the hell do people think lipstick
is for you know that that's such a
that's such a dismal and idiotic uh
criticism
the idea that lipstick and makeup has
nothing to do with sexual attractiveness
if you believe that you're an idiot and
so i don't mind restating that quite
vociferously and is there a place for
that in the workplace
that's a good question
and it's not a question that we've been
able to debate
uh intelligently you weren't saying it
wasn't possible you were just asking it
like it was a question right it's a
question about appropriate behavior in
the workplace
and i'm also not saying that women
shouldn't wear makeup in the workplace i
said it's a question yeah so yeah and
these you know this this twitter people
who
it looks if you look at social media it
looks like i'm faced by an overwhelming
opposition but simply not true
it's just not true i just wrote an
article for the telegraph which was the
most devastating article i could write i
thought i was done for by writing it i
basically called for the jailing of the
butchering surgeons who are
doing
gender reassignment surgery so-called on
minors
and
i called the american psychological
association a pack of spineless cowardly
liars and that's pretty
cut and dried i would say and
all of the comments are positive all of
them and so there's a tiny minority of
people who take issue with what i say
from time to time and they're very noisy
and many of them are journalists
especially female british journalists as
it turns out but
what that seems to manifest itself in
in the public domain is nothing i've had
no protests to speak of on this tour
we've gone to 60 cities i think in three
months
a handful of protesters a couple of
newspaper articles dragging up mostly
old lies
and all the rest of it is
thousands and thousands tens of
thousands of people who are trying to
put their life together and who are very
civil and positive and
not particularly interested in
polarizing political discussion
and that's the reality on the ground on
the trans issue uh because you have been
vocal about it
written articles and tweeted
um
is there is is another part of you that
maybe is afraid that in 30 or 40 years
it will be like having been against gay
marriage or gay
or or yeah absolutely 100 percent not
most do you think that this time is
different or or it's definitely
different most of the kids who are being
surgically mutilated would have grown up
to be gay
and the gay community is starting to
wake up to that and so now if you're a
10 year old boy and you're ambivalent
let's say or 12 year old boy or girl and
you're ambivalent about your
identity and perhaps about your
sexuality
we know the data suggested that a large
proportion of kids with that gender
body dysmorphia and gender dysmorphia
were
uh would it would grow up gay and but
most of them would settle into their
body like 85 percent of them or so who
have gender dysphoria at the clinical
level would settle into their body by
the time they're 18. and now
well a good number of them are slated
for hormonal and surgical
mutilation i do not think that we as a
country should tolerate the changes or
do you think no i think we should ban
the uh conversion of minors
to to to
to people of the opposite sex so to
speak if they're under 18 and i think we
should restore their ability to sue
medical professionals who dare to
intervene but others do you think they
should adults that's a whole different
story you know most people if people
want to go to hell in a hand basket in
their own particular way they have the
right to do that that's a different
issue but minors
especially
minors period no
no and the fact that we are even having
this discussion is just strikes me as
preposterous all sorts of western
countries have just moved to ban
so-called conversion therapy which was
wasn't a problem to begin with there was
a handful of fundamentalist christian
mostly therapists in the u.s who
purported to offer services to
uh
to aid
homosexual individuals who perhaps
wanted to
go straight and uh the gay community was
upset about that and so now we have
legislation banning conversion therapy
so you can't even if you're a therapist
you can no longer really even
question the identity claims of your
clients but you can convert kids
surgically so tell me how we can have be
having this conversation even it's just
beyond comprehension yeah it's it's uh i
think people have very different views
uh people a lot of people just want to
tolerate it and say this is fine what
tolerate what castration and double
mastectomies for 13 year olds no
seriously man that's not tolerance
that's that's crossed the line that is
not tolerance that that is an in
excusable
silence on the part of the majority the
vast majority who knows this to be
wrong in the deepest possible sense
most of the bloody nazi propaganda that
led to the extermination policies at the
beginning of world war ii were
predicated initially on compassion and
tolerance
so this whole we're being compassion and
tolerant it's like no you're not you're
aiding and abetting the surgical
mutilation of minors that is not
compassionate and it's not tolerant um
let's see
mr peterson like in the past couple of
years i've seen it on maybe your twitter
and now and maybe the way you speak
you you uh like
people are getting more polarized
we have a huge problem with
polarizations like polarization in the
us
like no one knows how that will end
it'll end with a huge democrat defeat in
the fall that'll be part of it yeah
you've grown to be
somewhat more political right you sound
like you may be running for office one
day you really you're really against the
truth government you really have
problems with your current canadian
government the reason that i've become
more political is because the political
types won't stay in their wheelhouse so
the reason i opposed bill c-16 to begin
with
which was the first political move i
ever made was because
because i knew what was going to happen
i knew bloody well what was going to
happen i knew
that this pronoun nonsense would produce
a psychogenic epidemic of gender
dysphoria mostly affecting young women
and that the consequence of that would
be that thousands of young people would
be sacrificed to hypothetically save a
tiny minority of people and with who
aren't being saved in any case i bloody
well knew that because i knew the
literature on psychogenic epidemics and
what the and how that was going to lay
itself out so this new gender dysphoria
problem which particularly affects young
women is the same
psychological
manifestation as say the cutting
epidemic in the 1990s and the 2000s
so
and there those psycho
psychogenic epidemics
they used to be called mass hysteria
there's a history documenting their
arise arising
going back 300 years it's a very well
documented phenomena and so when the
politicians get out of politics and
start infringing on basic rights which
are theologically founded they're no
longer political and at that point as
far as i'm concerned people have an
ethical obligation to step forward and
so don't to run for office
no no uh but uh i can't i don't have the
temperament for it but wouldn't it be
nice if we could just as societies all
be friends like whether you're trans or
not trans just everyone be a little more
in peace and uh peace is very difficult
to attack go forward with our societies
try to build some economies try to build
societies where we can all like because
the they are splitting into factions
like society yeah
yeah well who is it who is polarizing it
the radical left are you sure
yes yes i'm sure yes i'm sure
look i'll give you an example i have
lots of friends and colleagues on the
left and the right
and i've been working with the left for
a long time
um
especially with the democrats in the u.s
to pull the democratic party to the
center and we've had some success with
that although the democrats will not
they refuse
to draw a line
delimiting their moderation from the
radicals they will not do it now part of
that's a technical problem it's hard to
determine when the left goes too far i
have one suggestion when you're
expressing the sentiment that your
tolerance and compassion requires the
surgical mutilation of minors that's
when you've gone too far definitely i
also think you've gone too far when you
trumpet equity as a virtue but
the dividing line is difficult and the
democrats won't draw it and that's
because they think they need the
radicals
for
electoral victory and because they're
afraid of being mobbed and those are
both fears but
the left people on the left i've tried
to get them to communicate with people
on the right and vice versa the people
on the right will always talk to
everyone on the left and the people on
the left will frequently refuse flat out
to talk to people they regard as their
political enemies and then you add to
that the fact that the institutions of
higher education in particular are 100
percent captured by the left there are
no
hillsdale colleges like
where are the conservative educational
establishments oh there's hillsdale
college yeah it's like one and they're
thriving by the way and so no it's not
it's not just it's not an equally
divided polarization not in my
estimation and the ideas that threaten
us are
this pathological combination of
postmodernism which has its virtues by
the way and a default marxism that's
pulled in to fill the philosophical gaps
left by the nihilism of
post-modernism are you hoping for trump
again in 2024 no
no trump trump has many problems one is
he should have never declared that he
was
illegally defeated after the last
election it's an off-brand claim trump
is a winner that's his brand right and
winners don't have the election stolen
from them by losers and so i think he
made a catastrophic strategic mistake
as well as
and it's also the case that his claims
have really failed to be supported by
the relevant evidence they've been tried
in many courts
he's also he's got a bullying tendency
uh that i would
diagnose so so to speak as about nine to
11 years old um
very his go his cl his
he makes self aggrandizing bombastic
claims uh that to me are reminiscent of
a of a juvenile bully and
he's a divisive figure and so no i hope
the republicans have enough sense to go
with someone who's a more mainstream
politician and that they're guided by
a vision of what could be instead of a
mere
reaction to the idiocies of the woke and
progressive left
yeah they uh they just ruled out roe vs
weight yeah what do you think about that
well i think the democrats will attempt
to capitalize on that to stave off
electoral catastrophe in the
fall
i think that
we need to have an intelligent
conversation in our society which we're
probably not mature enough to do about
abortion in general
i know that in hungary
the family-friendly policies that have
been implemented there have raised the
birth rate and cut the abortion rate in
half
without the use of compulsion
i think that devolving responsibility
for abortion laws to the states that's
actually an idea that i'm i'm positively
predisposed to because i believe in
decentralized solutions and that will
mean the us can experiment with a wide
variety of approaches to the issue of
abortion and to me that is what is
necessary in the face of an intractable
and intractably polarizing
uh political and moral conundrum can we
end with one question uh mr peterson uh
we're here in iceland
we've had a quite normal social
democratic
welfare state for years now you've
talked about the power law that people
automatically at the top become richer
and more famous and more powerful we've
tried to tamper that with with our
government system do you think that's a
good idea
i would say it depends on how it's done
but but almost all
developed western countries have
experimented with variants of that and
it's very difficult to make the claim
that that hasn't been a net good
the
the balance between legislation and
radical free market solutions is a tough
one to strike it's hard for me to think
that the provision of old age pensions
universal provision of old age pensions
was an error the delimitation of the
work week
health care is a much more complicated
problem because it's also not a
monolithic problem there's no such thing
as health care right health is
well-being and
physical and psychological integrity
let's say
that's a multi-faceted problem and it
shouldn't be conceptualized in that
unitary manner it has to be broken down
and there's undoubtedly a role for the
private sector to play in the provision
of broad healthcare services and
a place for public intervention and
different countries do that in different
ways and we're trying to to sort that
out but no one
i don't think anyone who's credible
makes the case that all of that should
just come to a halt it's very difficult
the pareto distribution problem is a
very difficult one to solve you know the
tendency for
both power and ability to aggregate in
the hands of a small number of people
it's a it's a socially destabilizing
force and it has to be contended with
and we don't know how to contend with it
it's because it's such a powerful force
one way
not to contend with it is to blame it on
capitalism
because all that means is that's what
the leftists do all the time inequality
is a consequence of capitalism it's like
no it's not and also if you think that
you're not taking the problem seriously
enough and you're also attacking the
only system that has made poor people
rich
so
i think we will make that be the final
words
thank you so much for being with us and
good luck tonight and enjoy the rest of
your stay in iceland mr peterson thank
you thank you for the interview and
and and your wonderful country